title: "Rethinking Static Site Generators"
date: 2012-12-03 13:07
categories: python blug blog

If you're a regular reader of this blog and visited in the past few days, you
likely noticed a dramatic difference in the blog's look and feel. The HTML for this 
blog has been generated by [Blug](http://www.github.com/jeffknupp/blug), the
static site generator I started writing in July. Previously, I was using
Octopress and was generally happy with it. So was every other technical blogger
on the planet. Suddenly every technical blog on the planet looked identical, 
which doesn't really help your content stand out from the crowd. 

So I thought about changing to a different static site generator or alternate
theme in Octopress (do these even exist?). At some point during my research, I
had a revelation (of precisely zero insight): every static site generator does 
exactly the same thing. It collects your blog posts (written in the text format the
generator's author prefers), generates a bunch of static HTML pages, includes
some JavaScript scripts for marginally interesting fuctionality, then tells you
to go put it in front of your webserver and calls it a day. They mostly
differentiate on three axis:

1. From where your posts can be retreived for generation (i.e. locally, Dropbox,
git repo, etc.)
2. Theme/plugin support
3. Supported markup languages (usually either Markdown or reStructuredText)

That's all well and good, but what interested me was what happens *after* the
site is generated. You've just created an entirely static website, which even
the most underpowered webserver could serve up without batting an eyelash. I began
to wonder: *Why not capitalize on how little the webserver needs to do to serve
the site. There's no reason a static site can't have 'dynamic-ish' functionality*. I envisioned a system
where the generation of HTML is merely the first step. The real value would be
the ability to react on the fly to external events and regenerate the static
HTML accordingly.

In this vein, Blug is more than just a static site generator: it's *also a pure 
Python 3 webserver* that's capable of reacting to external events. Say you 
